---
title: "Izin Sipa"
aliases:
  - "izin sipa"
tags:
  - tenur-air
  - kerangka-hukum
  - regulasi
publish: true
---

# Izin Sipa

[NEEDS_TRANSLATION]

4. Boreholes and *tabat* for rewetting peatland Between 2016-2020, the Peatland Restoration Agency have constructed 13,869 boreholes and 6,631 overflow dam across Indonesia’s peatland. In 2021, 774 overflow dam and 110 boreholes have been constructed in all BRGM project areas.150 The Central Kalimantan provincial government have constructed 9860 boreholes in 95 villages and 85 regencies and 3182 *tabat* (overflow dam) in 67 villages and 8 regencies.151 In Pulau Pisang Regency alone, as of August, 2021, there are 199 144 AlAfghani (n 120\) 3\. 145 AlAfghani (n 120). 146 ibid. 147 ‘SIPALAGA’ \<https://SIPAlaga.brg.go.id/\> accessed 1 February 2022\. 148 ‘Data Sistem Pemantauan Air Lahan Gambut (SIPALAGA) BRGM RI Di Provinsi Kalimantan Tengah Tahun 2021 \- DINAS LINGKUNGAN HIDUP PROVINSI KALIMANTAN TENGAH’ (12 August 2021\) \<[http://dlh.kalteng.go.id/pengumuman/data-sistem-pemantauan-air-lahan-gambut-](http://dlh.kalteng.go.id/pengumuman/data-sistem-pemantauan-air-lahan-gambut-) SIPAlaga-brgm-ri-di-provinsi-kalimantan-tengah-bulan-maret-juli-2021/\> accessed 1 February 2022\. 149 ‘Oktober.Xlsx’ \<https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=http%3A%2F%2Fdlh.kalteng.go.id%2Fwp- content%2Fuploads%2F2022%2F01%2FOktober.xlsx\&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK\> accessed 1 February 2022\. 150 ‘Melihat Target BRGM Restorasi Gambut Dan Mangrove Pada 2022’ (*Mongabay.co.id*, 13 January 2022\) \<https://[www.mongabay.co.id/2022/01/13/melihat-target-brgm-restorasi-gambut-dan-](http://www.mongabay.co.id/2022/01/13/melihat-target-brgm-restorasi-gambut-dan-) mangrove-pada-2022/\> accessed 2 February 2022\. 151 ibid. See also ‘Perencanaan restorasi di 7 provinsi prioritas’ \<https://prims.brg.go.id/peta\> accessed 2 February 2022\. operating boreholes.152 Another 200 is expected to be constructed in order to help with fire prevention. Boreholes could be constructed with a permit, under the *de-minimis* rule or are assumed or informal tenure. The tenure over boreholes and tabat will be discussed separately below. 2. Spiritual Value of Water Indigenous population also have claims towards [[apa-itu-tenur-air]]. The Dayak Ngaju tribe occupies the areas, including along the river basin. The river is also spiritually important for the Dayak Ngaju Tribe. According to Sihombing (2019) some of the rituals involving the river includes “soaring”, which is providing offerings to the river accompanied by dances and “balai”, which is an agreement between human and crocodile, in which humans (after marriage) are not supposed to go down the river and cannot kill crocodile, unless the crocodile is guilty.153 The Tuba Adat ritual is a type of ritual conducting during long droughts in which they beg to *Ranying Hatalla* (the God in Hindu Kaharingan) for rain, through *Jata* (beings that controlled the river).154 Baier notes that while Hatalla is the deity of sky, Jata is deity of the riverine and the underworld.155 Sihombing also notes that Dayak people conform to the river instead of changing the river so that it conforms to them. This is manifested in many ways such as their design of buildings (Lanting House) adjacent to river. The Dayak community avoid farming on the riverbanks to allow the trees to grow and prevent erosion.156 3. Customary water use As mentioned earlier, local communities has strong relationship with their landscape. Such relationship resulted in various norms that is commonly accepted and governs the 152 ‘AntiSIPAsi Karhutla Gambut, 150 Sumur Bor di Pulang Pisau Dioptimalkan’ (*SINDOnews.com*) \<https://daerah.sindonews.com/read/517528/174/antiSIPAsi-karhutla-gambut-150-sumur-bor-di- pulang-pisau-dioptimalkan-1629518892\> accessed 2 February 2022\. 153 R Sally Marisa Sihombing, ‘The Role of The Indigenous Knowledge System of The Community Dayak In Water Management Kahayan River: Review of Local Wisdom Perspective’ \[2019\] Iapa Proceedings Conference 341\. 154 Satia Satia and others, *pukung pahewan Kearifan Lokal Suku Dayak Untuk Dunia* (Diva Press 2018). 155 Martin Baier, ‘The Development of the Hindu Kaharingan Religion: A New Dayak Religion in Central Kalimantan’ (2007) 102 Anthropos 566\. 156 Satia and others (n 154). relationship between people and nature along the case study area. Some of these norms have been practiced for a very long time, some emerged due to state intervention, both during colonial times or as a result of the new order ERP project. These local customs and norms exist alongside the positive law, as such; they could sometimes also overlap with each other. Some of the practices may have diminished, some are still accepted as the *de facto* living law. Note that not all of these customary water use, especially those relating to water bodies may not be recognized as “customary water law” under the Water Law. This is because in order for customary rules to be officially recognized by the law, three cumulative prerequisites has to be met157: (a) traditional society, (b) territoriality – specific claim to land (c) the relationship between community and their lands, including the utilization of the *Ulayat* land, management and control as valid and complied by the community. As we can see below, the requirements under the Water Law above, especially (b) and (c) may not be fulfilled in the case of Kahayan. The territorial claim, as noted by van Dijk, “…*is always juslified by some ideological, moral, légal or political reason, which is not ecological, but is based on thé perception of the people of their ecological and socio-political conditions*”158 which may not be present in the case of Kahayan as the default rule on the water bodies are considered “open access”.159 Thus, the requirement of a specific claim to an area (water bodies) as required by the law, is

[...content trimmed...]

## Lihat Juga

- [[apa-itu-tenur-air]]
- [[uu-17-2019]]
- [[kerangka-hukum]]

---

**Sumber:** Annex7, Section: SIPA Permit
**Catatan kaki:** Referensi inline terdeteksi (belum diformat sebagai footnote)
